---
title: Cyclostomes
author: Richard Dearden
layout: post
---

**In which we investigate life with out jaws, meet a surfeit of lampreys (and hagfishes), and investigate a monstrous mystery.**

*This post was recently moved from Wordpress, and is awaiting the reintroduction of its images*

You might have come across an unusual beast over the last week, lurking in the more palaeontological parts of the internet.  Vaguely fish-esque in overall shape it had a long, jointed feeding appendage, a claw-like mouth, and a bizarre horizontal eyestalk: this beast is Tullimonstrum gregarium, or the Tully Monster to its friends.  Palaeontologists have been puzzling over exactly what the Tully monster was ever since it was first described about 50 years ago, and this week a group has claimed it has solved this mystery.  Here we’ll be using it as a convenient excuse to talk about the group that these researchers placed it in: the jawless fishes, or cyclostomes.

Even with the Tully Monster to contend with, modern cyclostomes are pretty weird.  DISGUSTINGLY HOW WITHOUT JAWSWhile we know that they’re closely related to jawed vertebrates on the basis of anatomical components like a skull and neural crest (a unique developmental tissue) cyclostomes lack features unique to jawed vertebrates such as paired fins, bone and jaws.  Their internal skeleton is entirely formed from cartilage, and while they do have “teeth” they’re formed from keratin (the same stuff as your hair) and are mounted on laterally opening jaws. Two groups of cyclostomes live today - the hagfishes and the lampreys – both of which are superficially eel-like in form but otherwise pretty different.

Hagfishes are pretty grim.  They ply their existence as scavengers, feeding on more or less anything on the deep-sea floor with their sideways-opening mouthparts and rows of keratinous “teeth”.  This includes large carcasses, which they burrow into, and tear pieces off by tying their body into knots.  While inside the carcasses they can even can absorb nutrients through their skin and gills! To compound their disgustingness further they are also capable of producing large volumes of slime, which they use to escape predators and suffocate prey. GENOME

Before you’re sick everywhere, lets move onto the lampreys.  Lampreys are slightly more wholesome than their hagfishy brethren, so much so that they’re widely eaten (the English king Henry I supposedly died from eating too many lampreys).  Lampreys have a larval stage (called an ammocoete), which filter feed in rivers before metamorphosing into adults and migrating to lakes or the sea.  Here they live out their adult lives before returning to rivers to spawn and die.  While lampreys, like hagfishes, are superficially eel-like, they’re otherwise quite different: instead of rows their keratinous teeth form a ring, which they use to feed or to anchor onto rocks.  They are also more jawed-vertebrate-like in some respects: they have a series of vertebral elements and have 2 semicircular canals to the hagfishes’ 1.

These similarities have made cyclostomes proved difficult to pin down on the vertebrate family tree, with two competing scenarios.  Scenario 1: the similarities between gnathostomes and lampreys have their root in the fact that lampreys share a more recent common ancestor with gnathostomes than they do with hagfishes.  This would make cyclostomes “paraphyletic”, as they don’t include all of the descendants of a single common ancestor.  Scenario 2 is that the similarities between hagfishes and lampreys have arisen because they share a more recent common ancestor than either does with gnathostomes - this would make the cyclostomes “monophyletic”, or a true group that exclusively includes all the descendants of a common ancestor.  

Which of these was the case has implications for early vertebrate evolution.  If Scenario 1 is true it suggests that the earliest vertebrates were hagfish like, before acquiring lamprey-like characters and then gnathostome ones.  If scenario 2 is true it suggests the common ancestor had the characters that gnathostomes and lampreys share, but that hagfishes lost many of these characters.  When this question has been tested with morphological information, Scenario 1 has been found to be supported. However, analysis with genetic material has almost universally supported Scenario 2 and this seems likely to actually be the case: other work has shown that morphological data is insufficient to statistically distinguish between the two scenarios.

So why do morphological analyses continue to find cyclostomes to be paraphyletic? Possibly it’s because we understand so little about the early morphological evolution of cyclostomes. As you might expect, the fossil record hasn’t been very forgiving to a group of vertebrates with no mineralised skeleton to speak of.  Some of the stem-gnathostomes However we do have some fossil hagfishes and lampreys from sites where softer tissues have been uniquely well preserved.  The earliest of these, Priscomyzon, is a Devonian lamprey from South Africa. Many of the others, including Mayomyzon and Myxinikela come from a site from the Carboniferous of Illinois, called Mazon Creek.  All of these animals look much like the modern representatives of the groups to which they belong, suggesting that the cyclostome body plan went superficially unaltered for about 360 million years.

Enter the Tully Monster. Tullimonstrum, like Mayomyzon and Myxinikela, is from Mazon Creek, Illinois.  Unlike them however, it has proved recalcitrant to being identified because of an unhelpful combination of weird characters which make it almost unassignable to any living group.  Overall Tullimonstrum is vaguely eel/worm/slug shaped, with dark stripes described as gut traces running down its length: not very helpful in itself.  At the business end of the animal is a large horizontal bar, as well as a long proboscis which is tipped with a toothed crab-claw-esque thing.  This bizarre combination of characters have led to it being suggested that it’s an arthropod, molluscs and a number of kinds of worm.

So why would the Tully Monster be a cyclostome?  In Nature this week McCoy et al. examined 1286 specimens of Tullimonstrum and show that it had a series of elbows along the proboscis, multiple tooth rows and arcualia (cartilaginous vertebrae-equivalents). Using this and some badass comparative anatomy they argue that is related to vertebrates on the basis of its notochord (a backbone-like rod unique to vertebrates and relatives), gill pouches, and arcualia. Specifically the phylogenetic analysis that they carried out suggests that it that it falls within the cyclostomes, as an early representative of the lampreys.  This was because of its lamprey-like cartilages of the head, multiple rows of keratinous teeth and a single nostril. If the Tully Monster is a cyclostome the implications are pretty cool: clearly the cyclostomes played around with their morphology in the Palaeozoic a lot more than we previously appreciated, while at the same time already having evolved the body plans that allow them to cling onto their niches 300 million years later in today’s gnathostome-dominated seas and rivers.  Maybe even more interestingly in some ecosystems, such as Mazon Creek, cyclostomes played a far more major role than they do in any modern one 

I’m not necessarily convinced by the Tully monster being a lamprey - given that we can’t sort out living hagfishes and lampreys on the basis of morphological characters any placement seems likely to be pretty inexact, but I can buy it being an early vertebrate and maybe a cyclostome.  Unfortunately the lack of characters present in many of these slug-like splats mean we might never know for sure: sites like Mazon Creek offer a tantalising glimpse into ecologies full of jawless fishes like nothing we have today.
