---
title: Dead fishes- a primer
author: Richard Dearden
layout: post
---

**In which the aims of this blog are explained, our heroes introduced, and their manifold virtues extolled.**

*This post was recently moved from Wordpress, and is awaiting the reintroduction of its images*

The aim of this blog is to give me a place to write about dead fishes, and perhaps even for some people to read about them. More specifically I’ll be talking about early vertebrates, various creatures that swam the oceans, rivers, and lakes of the Palaeozoic, from about 541-252 million years ago.  Some articles (like this one) will summarise information about a particular group (in this case early vertebrates generally).  Others might investigate particularly interesting questions, look at a specific piece of research, or explore a particular method.  Sometimes, through gritted teeth, I might even talk about things that aren’t dead and/or fishes.  Given the entirety of palaeontology to choose from dead fishes might seem like a bit of a dull topic for a blog.  Why not choose ravenous dinosaurs, the dawn of multicellular life, or the very first humans as a theme? Hopefully I can convince you that early vertebrates can hold their own against even the most exciting of palaeontological adversaries.

Before we crack on with the early ones: what is a vertebrate?  The conventional definition of a vertebrate is anything with a backbone, and this is broadly true: you are a vertebrate, so is your dog, birds, trout, sharks, and a few less fishy things that live in the sea.  To understand how these fit together in terms of evolution see figure 1: a phylogeny (a sort of family tree) of all vertebrates.  You’ll see that vertebrates are divided into two sister groups: the jawed fishes (gnathostomes) and the jawless fishes (cyclostomes).  The cyclostomes only include two living group: the hagfishes and the lampreys, which pursue rather grimly specialised lifestyles as deep sea carcass scavengers and parasites respectively.  Every other vertebrate you can think of is instead a gnathostome: members of this group have many features the cyclostomes lack, including paired fins (or limbs), a bony skeleton, and - most obviously - jaws, and inhabit a vastly wider range of ecological niches.

The disparity between these two groups is one of the factors that make the early evolution of vertebrates so interesting to study.  Why have the gnathostomes been so successful in contrast to the cyclostomes?  Was it because of evolutionary innovations such as jaws and paired fins?  If so, can things like diversification be linked to one or more of these innovations? And how was the modern gnathostome body plan with all of these features assembled through time?  Questions like these are bigger than just vertebrates: they plug into wider issues of how evolution has worked as a process to give us the pattern of life we see on Earth today.  Unfortunately living vertebrates are of limited use in exploring the early parts of their history: the divergence of cyclostomes and gnathostomes took place during the Cambrian, over 500 million years ago

Fortunately the fossil record comes to the rescue, providing us with a means to peer into the past and see what long-extinct vertebrates looked like.  Fossils reveal that during the Palaeozoic a wide range of fossil vertebrates, in both jawless and jawed flavours, existed that look little like anything we see today.  Major jawless groups include the heterostracans, with massive oval headshields, osteostracans, likely bottom-feeders with gnathostome-like paired fins and horseshoe-shaped skulls, and the thelodonts, enigmatic fishes with an almost shark-like covering of tiny scales.  Jawed groups include the placoderms, heavily plated in armour, and acanthodians, which had a suite of spined fins and shark-like scales.  These two jawed “groups” (although they probably aren’t true groups at all) are uncontroversially more closely related to living gnathostomes than to cyclostomes.  Counter-intuitively the various bony jawless groups are probably also actually more closely related to gnathostomes than to cyclostomes.  Together this evidence shows us that the modern gnathostome body plan evolved bit by bit, with different morphological innovations like bones, teeth and paired fins, being introduced at different stages.

Despite our having this broad picture much remains unknown about early vertebrate evolution.  The very earliest bony-skeletoned vertebrates are extremely poorly known.  Groups like osteostracans and heterostracans seem to pop into existence in the late Silurian: we know that bony-skeletoned vertebrates must have existed prior to this from scraps of bone and even a few whole-body specimens from the Ordovician, but our knowledge of how they relate to other early vertebrates is limited.  We also have only a poor understanding of the very earliest parts of the modern bony and cartilaginous fishes’ evolutionary history, and how the jawed placoderms and acanthodians fit into the picture.  All of this limits our understanding of both vertebrate evolution specifically and evolution more widely. 

The fact that we know so little about this incredibly important period in our evolutionary history is what makes early vertebrates so interesting.  Despite being 200-odd years old the field remains exciting, with modern technologies like CT scanning giving new leases of life to fossils originally described in the 19th century. Outside museums new early vertebrate fossils continue to be found, which can have massive implications for our understanding of their anatomy and relationships. It seems likely that the study of early vertebrates (and hopefully this blog) will continue to flourish well into the future.
